<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
			<p>A printer in the office crawled under the bed of the machine to replace something⁠—a nut that had dropped; it was not known that he was there; the crank came round and crushed him against the brickwork. The embrace of iron is death.</p>
			<p>Alere fed his helpless children, and apprenticed them when they were old enough.</p>
			<p>Ten pounds was enough for him⁠—without ambition, and without business-avarice; ten pounds was enough for his Fleet Street life.</p>
			<p>It was not only the actual money he gave away, but the kindness of the man. Have you ever noticed the boys who work in printing-offices?⁠—their elbows seem so sharp and pointed, bony, and without flesh. Instead of the shirt-sleeve being turned up, it looks as if the pointed elbow had thrust its way through.</p>
			<p>He always had something for them;⁠—a plate of beef, soup, beer to be shared, apples, baked potatoes, now and then half-a-dozen mild cigars. Awful this, was it not? Printers’ boys <em>will</em> smoke; they had better have Flamma’s fine tobacco than the vile imitation they buy.</p>
			<p>They always had a tale for him; either their mothers, or sisters, or some one was in trouble; Flamma was certain to do something, however little might be within his power. At least he went to see.</p>
			<p>Had a man an income of a million he could not relieve the want of London; the wretch relieved to-day needs again to-morrow. But Alere went to see.</p>
			<p>Ten pounds did much in the shaky hands of a man without ambition, and without business-avarice, who went to see the unfortunate.</p>
			<p>His own palsied mother, at the verge of life, looked to Alere for all that the son can do for the parent. Other sons seemed more capable of such duty; yet it invariably fell upon Alere. He was the Man. And for those little luxuries and comforts that soothe the dull hours of trembling age she depended entirely upon him.</p>
			<p>So you see the ten-pound notes that satisfied him were not all spent in drink.</p>
			<p>But alas! once now and then the rats began to run up the wall in broad daylight, and foolish Alere, wise in this one thing, immediately began to pack his carpet-bag. He put in his collars, his slippers, his sketch-books and pencils, some of his engraving tools, and a few blocks of boxwood, his silver-mounted flute, and a book for Amaryllis. He packed his carpet-bag and hastened away to his Baden-Baden, to Coombe Oaks, his spa among the apple-bloom, the song of finches, and rustle of leaves.</p>
			<p>They sat and talked in the round summer-house in Iden’s garden, with the summer unfolding at their knees; Amaryllis, Amadis, Iden, and Flamma.</p>
			<p>By Flamma’s side there stood a great mug of the Goliath ale, and between his lips there was a long churchwarden pipe.</p>
			<p>The Goliath ale was his mineral water; his gaseous, alkaline, chalybeate liquor; better by far than Kissingen, Homburg, Vichy; better by far than mud baths and hot springs. There is no medicine in nature, or made by man, like good ale. He who drinks ale is strong.</p>
			<p>The bitter principle of the aromatic hops went to his nervous system, to the much-suffering liver, to the clogged and weary organs, bracing and stimulating, urging on, vitalizing anew.</p>
			<p>The spirit drawn from the joyous barley warmed his heart; a cordial grown on the sunny hill-side, watered with dew and sweet rain, coloured by the light, a liquor of sunshine, potable sunbeam.</p>
			<p>Age mingling hops and barley in that just and equitable proportion, no cunning of hand, no science can achieve, gave to it the vigour of years, the full manhood of strength.</p>
			<p>There was in it an alchemic power analysis cannot define. The chemist analyzes, and he finds of ten parts, there are this and there are that, and the residue is “volatile principle,” for which all the dictionaries of science have no explanation.</p>
			<p>“Volatile principle”⁠—there it is, that is the secret. That is the life of the thing; by no possible means can you obtain that volatile principle⁠—that alchemic force⁠—except contained in genuine old ale.</p>
			<p>Only it must be genuine, and it must be old; such as Iden brewed.</p>
			<p>The Idens had been famous for ale for generations.</p>
			<p>By degrees Alere’s hand grew less shaky; the glass ceased to chink against his teeth; the strong, good ale was setting his Fleet Street liver in order.</p>
			<p>You have “liver,” you have “dyspepsia,” you have “kidneys,” you have “abdominal glands,” and the doctor tells you you must take bitters, <i>i.e.</i>, quassia, buchu, gentian, cascarilla, calumba; aperients and diluents, podophyllin, taraxacum, salts; physic for the nerves and blood, quinine, iron, phosphorus; this is but the briefest outline of your draughts and preparations; add to it for various purposes, liquor arsenicalis, bromide of potassium, strychnia, belladonna.</p>
			<p>Weary and disappointed, you turn to patent medicines⁠—American and French patent physic is very popular now⁠—and find the same things precisely under taking titles, enormously advertised.</p>
			<p>It is a fact that nine out of ten of the medicines compounded are intended to produce exactly the same effects as are caused by a few glasses of good old ale. The objects are to set the great glands in motion, to regulate the stomach, brace the nerves, and act as a tonic and cordial; a little ether put in to aid the digestion of the compound. This is precisely what good old ale does, and digests itself very comfortably. Above all things, it contains the volatile principle, which the prescriptions have not got.</p>
			<p>Many of the compounds actually are beer, bittered with quassia instead of hops; made nauseous in order that you may have faith in them.</p>
			<p>“Throw physic to the dogs,” get a cask of the true Goliath, and “<i>drenk un down to the therd hoop</i>.”</p>
			<p>Long before Alere had got to the first hoop the rats ceased to run up the wall, his hand became less shaky, he began to play a very good knife and fork at the bacon and Iden’s splendid potatoes; by-and-by he began to hum old German songs.</p>
			<p>But you may ask, how do <em>you</em> know, you’re not a doctor, you’re a mere story-spinner, you’re no authority? I reply that I am in a position to know much more than a doctor.</p>
			<p>How can that be?</p>
			<p>Because I have been a Patient. It is so much easier to be a doctor than a patient. The doctor imagines what his prescriptions are like and what they will do; he imagines, but the Patient <em>knows</em>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
