<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
			<p>Old Grandfather Iden always dined alone in the parlour, with his housekeeper to wait on him; they were just bringing in his food. The family and visitors had their meals in a separate and much more comfortable apartment in another part of the house, which was large. Sometimes, as a great favour and special mark of approval, the old Pacha would invite you to eat with him.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis, though anxious to please him, hesitated, not only because of the smoke, but because she knew he always had pork for dinner.</p>
			<p>The rich juices of roast pork sustained his dry and withered frame⁠—it was a sort of Burgundy of flesh to him. As the good wine of Burgundy fills the blood with iron and strengthens the body, so the rich juice of the pork seemed to supply the oil necessary to keep the sinews supple and to prevent the cartilages from stiffening.</p>
			<p>The scientific people say that it is the ossification of the cartilages⁠—the stiffening of the firmer tissues⁠—that in time interferes with the processes of life. The hinges rust, as if your tricycle had been left out in the rain for a week⁠—and the delicate watchwork of the human frame will not run.</p>
			<p>If suppleness could only be maintained there is no reason why it should not continue to work for a much longer period, for a hundred and fifty, two hundred years⁠—as long as you fancy. But nothing has yet been devised to keep up the suppleness.</p>
			<p>Grandfather Iden found the elixir of life in roast pork. The jokers of Woolhorton⁠—there are always jokers, very clever they think themselves⁠—considered the reason it suited him so well was because of the pig-like obstinacy of his disposition.</p>
			<p>Anything more contrary to common sense than for an old man of ninety to feed on pork it would be hard to discover⁠—so his friends said.</p>
			<p>“Pork,” said the physician, had down from London to see him on one occasion, “pork is the first on the list of indigestible articles of food. It takes from six to eight hours for the gastric apparatus to reduce its fibres. The stomach becomes overloaded⁠—acidity is the result; nightmares, pains, and innumerable ills are the consequence. The very worst thing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Iden could eat.”</p>
			<p>“Hum,” growled the family doctor, a native of Woolhorton, when he heard of this. “Hum!” low in his throat, like an irate bulldog. If in the least excited, like most other country folk, he used the provincial pronunciation. “Hum! A’ have lived twenty years on pork. Let’n yet it!”</p>
			<p>Grandfather Iden intended to eat it, and did eat it six days out of seven, not, of course, roast pork every dinner; sometimes boiled pork; sometimes he baked it himself in the great oven. Now and then he varied it with pig-meat⁠—good old country meat, let me tell you, pig-meat⁠—such as sparerib, griskin, blade-bone, and that mysterious morsel, the “mouse.” The chine he always sent over for Iden junior, who was a chine eater⁠—a true Homeric diner⁠—and to make it even, Iden junior sent in the best apples for sauce from his favourite russet trees. It was about the only amenity that survived between father and son.</p>
			<p>The pig-meat used to be delicious in the old house at home, before we all went astray along the different paths of life; fresh from the pigs fed and killed on the premises, nutty, and juicy to the palate. Much of it is best done on a gridiron⁠—here’s heresy! A gridiron is flat blasphemy to the modern school of scientific cookery. Scientific fiddlestick! Nothing like a gridiron to set your lips watering.</p>
			<p>But the “mouse,”⁠—what was the “mouse?” The London butchers can’t tell me. It was a titbit. I suppose it still exists in pigs; but London folk are so ignorant.</p>
			<p>Grandfather Iden ate pig in every shape and form, that is, he mumbled the juice out of it, and never complained of indigestion.</p>
			<p>He was up at five o’clock every morning of his life, pottering about the great oven with his baker’s man. In summer if it was fine he went out at six for a walk in the Pines⁠—the promenade of Woolhorton.</p>
			<p>“If you wants to get well,” old <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Butler used to say, “you go for a walk in the marning afore the aair have been braathed auver.”</p>
			<p>Before the air has been breathed over⁠—inspired and re-inspired by human crowds, while it retains the sweetness of the morning, like water fresh from the spring; that was when it possessed its value, according to bluff, gruff, rule-of-thumb old Butler. Depend upon it, there is something in his dictum, too.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis hesitated at the thought of the pork, for he often had it underdone, so the old gentleman dismissed her in his most gracious manner to dine with the rest.</p>
			<p>She went down the corridor and took the seat placed for her. There was a posy of primroses beside her napkin⁠—posies of primroses all round the table.</p>
			<p>This raging old Tory of ninety years would give a shilling for the earliest primrose the boys could find for him in the woods. Someone got him a peacock’s feather which had fallen from Beaconsfield’s favourites⁠—a real Beaconsfield peacock-feather⁠—which he had set in the centre of a splendid screen of feathers that cost him twenty guineas. The screen was upstairs in the great drawing-room near a bow window which overlooked the fair.</p>
			<p>People, you see, took pains to get him feathers and anything he fancied, on account of the twenty thousand spade guineas in the iron box under the bed.</p>
			<p>His daughters, elderly, uninteresting married folk, begged him not to keep a peacock’s feather in the house⁠—it would certainly bring misfortune. The superstition was so firmly rooted in their minds that they actually argued with him⁠—<em>argued</em> with Grandfather Iden!⁠—pointing out to him the fearful risk he was running. He puffed and coughed, and grew red in the face⁠—the great grey hat shook and tottered with anger; not for all the Powers of Darkness would he have given up that feather.</p>
			<p>The chairs round the large table were arranged in accordance with the age of the occupants. There were twenty-one grandchildren, and a number of aunts, uncles, and so on; a vague crowd that does not concern us. The eldest sat at the head of the table, the next in age followed, and so all round the dishes. This arrangement placed Amaryllis rather low down⁠—a long way from the top and fountain of honour⁠—and highly displeased her. She despised and disliked the whole vague crowd of her relations, yet being there, she felt that she ought to have had a position above them all. Her father⁠—Iden, junior⁠—was old Iden’s only son and natural heir; therefore her father’s chair ought to have been at the top of the table, and hers ought to have been next to his.</p>
			<p>Instead of which, as her father was not the eldest, his seat was some distance from the top, and hers again, was a long way from his.</p>
			<p>All the other chairs were full, but her father’s chair was empty.</p>
			<p>The vague crowd were so immensely eager to pay their despicable court to the Spade-Guinea Man, not one of them stopped away; the old, the young, the lame, the paralytic, all found means to creep in to Grandfather Iden’s annual dinner. His only son and natural heir was alone absent. How eagerly poor Amaryllis glanced from time to time at that empty chair, hoping against hope that her dear father would come in at the Psalms, or even at the sermon, and disappoint the venomous, avaricious hearts of the enemies around her.</p>
			<p>For well she knew how delighted they were to see his chair empty, as a visible sign and token of the gulf between father and son, and well she knew how diligently each laboured to deepen the misunderstanding and set fuel to the flame of the quarrel. If the son were disinherited, consider the enormous profit to the rest of them!</p>
			<p>Grandfather Iden made no secret of the fact that he had not signed a will. It was believed that several rough drafts had been sketched out for him, but, in his own words⁠—and he was no teller of falsehoods⁠—he had not decided on his will. If only they could persuade him to make his will they might feel safe of something; but suppose he went off pop, all in a moment, as these extraordinarily healthy old people are said to do, and the most of his estate in land! Consider what a contingency⁠—almost all of it would go to his own son. Awful thing!</p>
			<p>Amaryllis was aware how they all stared at her and quizzed her over and over; her hair, her face, her form, but most of all her dress. They were so poor at home she had not had a new dress this twelvemonth past; it was true her dress was decent and comfortable, and she really looked very nice in it to any man’s eye; but a girl does not want a comfortable dress, she wants something in the style of the day, and just sufficiently advanced to make the women’s eyes turn green with envy. It is not the men’s eyes; it is the women’s eyes.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis sat up very quiet and unconcerned, trying with all her might to make them feel she was the Heiress, not only an only son’s only daughter, but the only son’s only offspring⁠—doubly the Heiress of Grandfather Iden.</p>
			<p>The old folk, curious in such matters, had prophesied so soon as she was born that there would be no more children at Coombe Oaks, and so it fell out. For it had been noticed in the course of generations, that in the direct line of Iden when the first child was a daughter there were none to follow. And further, that there never was but one Miss Iden at a time.</p>
			<p>If the Direct Line had a daughter first, they never had any more children; consequently that daughter was the only Miss Iden.</p>
			<p>If the Direct Line had a son, they never had a second son, though they might have daughters; but then, in order that there should still be only one Miss Iden, it always happened that the first died, or was married early, before the second came into existence.</p>
			<p>Such was the tradition of the Iden family; they had a long pedigree, the Idens, reaching farther back than the genealogies of many a peer, and it had been observed that this was the rule of their descent.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis was the only Miss Iden, and the heiress, through her father, of the Spade-Guinea Man. She tried to make them feel that she knew it and felt it; that she was the Iden of the Idens. Her proud face⁠—it was a very proud face naturally⁠—darkened a little, and grew still more disdainful in its utter scorn and loathing of the vague crowd of enemies.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
