<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>When Mrs. Iden threw his lardy-cake descent in Iden’s face she alluded to Grandfather Iden’s being a baker and miller, and noted for the manufacture of these articles. A lardy, or larded, cake is a thing, I suppose, unknown to most of this generation; they were the principal confectionery familiar to country folk when Grandfather Iden was at the top of his business activity, seventy years since, in the Waterloo era.</p>
			<p>A lardy-cake is an oblong, flat cake, crossed with lines, and rounded at the corners, made of dough, lard, sugar, and spice. Our ancestors liked something to gnaw at, and did not go in for lightness in their pastry; they liked something to stick to their teeth, and after that to their ribs. The lardy-cake eminently fulfilled these conditions; they put a trifle of sugar and spice in it, to set it going as it were, and the rest depended on the strength of the digestion. But if a ploughboy could get a new, warm lardy-cake, fresh from the oven, he thought himself blessed.</p>
			<p>Grandfather Iden had long since ceased any serious business, but he still made a few of these renowned cakes for his amusement, and sold a good few at times to the carters’ lads who came in to market.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis knew the path perfectly, but if she had not, the tom-tomming of drums and blowing of brass, audible two miles away, would have guided her safely to the fair. The noise became prodigious as she approached⁠—the ceaseless tomtom, the beating of drums and gongs outside the show vans, the shouting of the showmen, the roar of a great crowd, the booing of cattle, the baaing of sheep, the neighing of horses⁠—altogether the “rucket” was tremendous.</p>
			<p>She looked back from the hill close to the town and saw the people hurrying in from every quarter⁠—there was a string of them following the path she had come, and others getting over distant stiles. A shower had fallen in the night, but the ceaseless wheels had ground up the dust again, and the lines of the various roads were distinctly marked by the clouds hanging above them. For one on business, fifty hastened on to join the uproar.</p>
			<p>Suppose the Venus de Medici had been fetched from Florence and had been set up in the town of Woolhorton, or the Laocoon from Rome, or the Milo from Paris, do you think all these people would have scurried in such haste to admire these beautiful works? Nothing of the sort; if you want a crowd you must make a row. It is really wonderful how people do thoroughly and unaffectedly enjoy a fearful disturbance; if the cannon could be shot off quietly, and guns made no noise, battles would not be half so popular to read about. The silent arrow is uninteresting, and if you describe a mediæval scramble you must put in plenty of splintering lances, resounding armour, shrieks and groans, and so render it lively.</p>
			<p>“This is the patent age of new inventions,” and some one might make a profit by starting a fête announcing that a drum or a gong would be provided for every individual, to be beaten in a grand universal chorus.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis had no little difficulty in getting through the crowd till she found her way behind the booths and slipped along the narrow passage between them and the houses. There was an arched entrance, archæologically interesting, by which she paused a moment, half inclined to go up and inquire for her boots. The shoemaker who lived there had had them since Christmas, and all that wanted doing was a patch on one toe; they were always just going to be done, but never finished. She read the inscription over his door, “Tiras Wise, Shoemaker; Established 1697.” A different sort of shoemaker to your lively Northampton awls; a man who has been in business two hundred years cannot be hurried. She sighed, and passed on.</p>
			<p>The step to Grandfather Iden’s door consisted of one wide stone of semi-circular shape, in which the feet of three generations of customers had worn a deep grove. The venerable old gentleman, for he was over ninety, was leaning on the hatch (or lower half of the door), in the act of handing some of his cakes to two village girls who had called for them. These innocent, hamlet girls, supposed to be so rurally simple, had just been telling him how they never forgot his nice cakes, but always came every fair day to buy some. For this they got sixpence each, it being well known that the old gentleman was so delighted with anybody who bought his cakes he generally gave them back their money, and a few coppers besides.</p>
			<p>He took Amaryllis by the arm as she stood on the step and pulled her into the shop, asked her if her father were coming, then walked her down by the oven-door, and made her stand up by a silver-mounted peel, to see how tall she was. The peel is the long wooden rod, broad at one end, with which loaves are placed in the baker’s oven. Father Iden being proud of his trade, in his old age had his favourite peel ornamented with silver.</p>
			<p>“Too fast⁠—too fast,” he said, shaking his head, and coughing; “you grow too fast; there’s the notch I cut last year, and now you’re two inches taller.” He lowered the peel, and showed her where his thumb was⁠—quite two inches higher than the last year’s mark.</p>
			<p>“I want to be tall,” said Amaryllis.</p>
			<p>“I daresay⁠—I daresay,” said the old man, in the hasty manner of feeble age, as he cut another notch to record her height. The handle of the peel was notched all round, where he had measured his grandchildren; there were so many marks it was not easy to see how he distinguished them.</p>
			<p>“Is your father coming?” he asked, when he had finished with the knife.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know.” This was Jesuitically true⁠—she did not <i>know</i>⁠—she could not be certain; but in her heart she was sure he would not come. But she did not want to hear any hard words said about him.</p>
			<p>“Has he sent anything? Have you brought anything for me? No. No. Hum!⁠—ha!”⁠—fit of coughing⁠—“Well, well⁠—come in; dinner’s late, there’s time to hear you read⁠—you’re fond of books, you read a great deal at home,”⁠—and so talking, half to himself and half to her, he led the way into the parlour by the shop.</p>
			<p>Bowed by more than ninety years, his back curved over forwards, and his limbs curved in the opposite direction, so that the outline of his form resembled a flattened capital S. For his chin hung over his chest, and his knees never straightened themselves, but were always more or less bent as he stood or walked. It was much the attitude of a strong man heavily laden and unable to stand upright⁠—such an attitude as big Jack Duck in his great strength might take when carrying two sacks of wheat at once. There was as heavy a load on Grandfather Iden’s back, but Time is invisible.</p>
			<p>He wore a grey suit, as a true miller and baker should, and had worn the same cut and colour for years and years. In the shop, too, he always had a grey hat on, perhaps its original hue was white, but it got to appear grey upon him; a large grey chimney-pot, many sizes too big for his head apparently, for it looked as if for ever about to descend and put out his face like an extinguisher. Though his boots were so carefully polished, they quickly took a grey tint from the flour dust as he pottered about the bins in the morning. The ends of his trousers, too long for his antique shanks, folded and creased over his boots, and almost hid his grey cloth under-gaiters.</p>
			<p>A great knobbed old nose⁠—but stay, I will not go further, it is not right to paint too faithfully the features of the very aged, which are repellent in spite of themselves; I mean, they cannot help their faces, their sentiments and actions are another matter; therefore I will leave Father Iden’s face as a dim blot on the mirror; you look in it and it reflects everywhere, except one spot.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis followed him jauntily⁠—little did she care, reckless girl, for the twenty thousand guineas in the iron box under his bed.</p>
			<p>The cottage folk, who always know so much, had endless tales of Iden’s wealth; how years ago bushels upon bushels of pennies, done up in five-shilling packets, had been literally carted like potatoes away from the bakehouse to go to London; how ponies were laden with sacks of silver groats, all paid over that furrowed counter for the golden flour, dust more golden than the sands of ancient Pactolus.</p>
			<p>Reckless Amaryllis cared not a pin for all the spade guineas in the iron box.</p>
			<p>The old man sat down by the fire without removing his hat, motioning to her to shut the door, which she was loth to do, for the little room was smothered with smoke. Troubled with asthma, he coughed incessantly, and mopped his mouth with a vast silk handkerchief, but his dull blood craved for warmth, and he got his knees close to the grate, and piled up the coal till it smoked and smoked, and filled the close apartment with a suffocating haze of carbon. To be asked into Father Iden’s sanctuary was an honour, but, like other honours, it had to be paid for.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis gasped as she sat down, and tried to breathe as short as possible, to avoid inhaling more than she could bear.</p>
			<p>“Books,” said her grandfather, pointing to the bookcases, which occupied three sides of the room. “Books⁠—you like books; look at them⁠—go and see.”</p>
			<p>To humour him, Amaryllis rose, and appeared to look carefully along the shelves which she had scanned so many times before. They contained very good books indeed, such books as were not to be found elsewhere throughout the whole town of Woolhorton, and perhaps hardly in the county, old and rare volumes of price, such as Sotheby, Wilkinson, and Co. delight to offer to collectors, such as Bernard Quaritch, that giant of the modern auction room, would have written magnificent cheques for.</p>
			<p>Did you ever see the Giant Quaritch in the auction-room bidding for books? It is one of the sights of London, let me tell you, to any one who thinks or is alive to the present day. Most sights are reputations merely⁠—the pale reflection of things that were real once. This sight is something of the living time, the day in which we live. Get an <i>Athenæum</i> in the season, examine the advertisements of book auctions, and attend the next great sale of some famous library.</p>
			<p>You have a recollection of the giant who sat by the highway and devoured the pilgrims who passed? This giant sits in the middle of the ring and devours the books set loose upon their travels after the repose of centuries.</p>
			<p>What prices to give! No one can withstand him. From Paris they send agents with a million francs at their back; from Berlin and Vienna come the eager snappers-up of much considered trifles, but in vain. They only get what the Giant chooses to leave them.</p>
			<p>Books that nobody ever heard of fetch £50, £60, £100, £200; wretched little books never opened since they were printed; dull duodecimos on the course of the river Wein; nondescript indescribable twaddling local books in Italian, Spanish, queer French, written and printed in some unknown foreign village; read them⁠—you might as well try to amuse yourself with a Chinese pamphlet! What earthly value they are of cannot be discovered. They were composed by authors whose names are gone like the sand washed by the Nile into the sea before Herodotus. They contain no beautiful poetry, no elevated thought, no scientific discovery; they are simply so much paper, printing, and binding, so many years old, and it is for that age, printing, and binding that the money is paid.</p>
			<p>I have read a good many books in my time⁠—I would not give sixpence for the whole lot.</p>
			<p>They are not like a block-book⁠—first efforts at printing; nor like the first editions of great authors; there is not the slightest intrinsic value in them whatever.</p>
			<p>Yet some of them fetch prices which not long ago were thought tremendous even for the Shakespeare folio.</p>
			<p>Hundreds and hundreds of pounds are paid for them. Living and writing authors of the present day are paid in old songs by comparison.</p>
			<p>Still, this enormous value set on old books is one of the remarkable signs of the day. If any one wishes to know what To-Day is, these book-auctions are of the things he should go to see.</p>
			<p>Such books as these lined Grandfather Iden’s shelves; among them there were a few that I call <i>real</i> old books, an early translation or two, an early Shakespeare, and once there had been a very valuable Boccaccio, but this had gone into Lord Pamment’s library, “Presented by James Bartholomew Iden, Esq.”</p>
			<p>The old man often went to look at and admire his Boccaccio in my Lord’s library.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
