<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
			<p>Steadily they came over from the town, dunning Iden and distracting Amaryllis in her garret. She heard the heavy footsteps on the path to the door, the thump, thump with the fist (there was neither knocker nor bell, country fashion); more thumping, and then her mother’s excuses, so oft repeated, so wearisome, so profitless. “But where is he?” the creditor would persist. “He’s up at the Hayes,” or “He’s gone to Green Hills.” “Well, when will he be in?” “Don’t know.” “But I wants to know when this yer little account is going to be settled.” Then a long narration of his wrongs, threats of “doing summat,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, summoning, grumble, grumble, and so slow, unwilling steps departing.</p>
			<p>Very rude men came down from the villages demanding payment in their rough way⁠—a raw, crude way, brutally insulting to a lady. Iden had long since exhausted his credit in the town; neither butcher, baker, draper, nor anyone else would let them have a shilling’s-worth until the shilling had been placed on the counter. He had been forced lately to deal with the little men of the villages⁠—the little butcher who killed once a fortnight; the petty cottagers’ baker, and people of that kind. Inferior meat and inferior bread on credit first; coarse language and rudeness afterwards.</p>
			<p>One day, the village baker, having got inside the door as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden incautiously opened it, stood there and argued with her, while Amaryllis in the garret put down her trembling pencil to listen.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Iden will send it up,” said her mother.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he’ll send it up. When will he send it up?”</p>
			<p>“He’ll send it up.”</p>
			<p>“He’ve a’ said that every time, but it beant come yet. You tell un I be come to vetch it.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Iden’s not in.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll bide till he be in.”</p>
			<p>“He’ll only tell you he’ll send it up.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll bide and see un. You’ve served I shameful. It’s nothing but cheating⁠—that’s what I calls it⁠—to have things and never pay for um. It’s cheating.”</p>
			<p>Amaryllis tore downstairs, flushed with passion.</p>
			<p>“How dare you say such a thing? How dare you insult my mother? Leave the house this moment!”</p>
			<p>And with both hands she literally pushed the man, unwilling, but not absolutely resisting, outside, grumbling as he moved that he never insulted nobody, only asked for his money.</p>
			<p>A pleasing preparation this for steadiness of hand, calculated to encourage the play of imagination! She could do nothing for hours afterwards.</p>
			<p>Just as often Iden was at home, and then it was worse, because it lasted longer. First they talked by the potato-patch almost under the window; then they talked on the path; then they came indoors, and then there were words and grumbling sounds that rose up the staircase. By-and-by they went out again and talked by the gate. At last the creditor departed, and Iden returned indoors to take a glass of ale and sit a moment till the freshness of the annoyance had left his mind. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden then had her turn at him: the old story⁠—why didn’t he do something? Amaryllis knew every word as well as if she had been sitting in the room.</p>
			<p>How Iden had patience with them Amaryllis could not think; how he could stand, and be argued with, and abused, and threatened, and yet not take the persecutor by the collar and quietly put him in the road, she could not understand.</p>
			<p>The truth was he could not help himself; violence would have availed nothing. But to youth it seems as if a few blows are all that is needed to overcome difficulties.</p>
			<p>Waller and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, the tailor⁠—he was his own <abbr>Co.</abbr>⁠—walked over regularly once a week; very civil and very persistent, and persistent in vain. How he came to be a creditor was not easy to see, for Iden’s coat was a pattern of raggedness, his trousers bare at the knee, and his shabby old hat rotten. But somehow or other there was a five-pound account two years overdue.</p>
			<p>Cobb, the butcher at Woolhorton, got off his trap as he went by, at least twice a week, to chivey Iden about his money. Though he would not let them have a mutton chop without payment, whenever there was five shillings to spare for meat it was always taken into his shop, as it was better to have good meat there, if you had to pay cash for meat, than inferior in the village. One day, Amaryllis was waiting for some steak, side by side with a poor woman, waiting for scraps, while Cobb served a grand lady of the town. “Yes, m’m⁠—oh, yes, m’m, certainly, m’m,” bows, and scrapes, and washing of hands, all the obsequiousness possible. When the fine lady had gone, “Lar, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cobb,” says the poor woman, “how different you do speak to <em>they</em> to what you do speak to <em>me</em>.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes,” replied Cobb, not in the least abashed at having one manner for the poor and another for the rich. “Yes, you see, these ladies they require such a deal of <em>homage</em>.”</p>
			<p>There was a long bill at Beavan’s the grocer’s, but that was not much pressed, only a large blue letter about once a month, as Beavan had a very good profit out of them through the butter. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden made excellent butter, which had a reputation, and Beavan took it all at about half-price. If it had been sold to anyone else he would have insisted on payment. So, by parting with the best butter in the county at half-price, they got their tea and sugar without much dunning.</p>
			<p>At one time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden became excited and strange in her manner, as if on the point of hysterics, from which Amaryllis divined something serious was approaching, though her mother would say nothing. So it turned out⁠—a bailiff appeared, and took up his quarters in the kitchen. He was very civil and quiet; he sat by the great fire of logs, and offered to help in any way he could. Iden gave him plenty of beer, for one thing. Amaryllis could not go into the kitchen⁠—the dear old place seemed deserted while he was there.</p>
			<p>This woke up Iden for the moment. First there was a rummaging about in his old bureau, and a laborious writing of letters, or adding up of figures. Next there was a great personal getting up, a bath, clean linen, shaving, and donning of clothes packed away these years past. In two hours or so Iden came down another man, astonishingly changed, quite a gentleman in every respect, and so handsome in Amaryllis’s eyes. Indeed, he was really handsome still, and to her, of course, wonderfully so. If only he would always dress like that!</p>
			<p>Iden walked into Woolhorton, but all these preparations had so consumed the time that the bank was shut, the solicitor’s offices closed, and there was no means of raising any money that evening. The son passed the father’s doorstep⁠—the worn stone step, ground by the generations of customers⁠—he saw the light behind the blind in the little room where Grandfather Iden sat⁠—he might, had he paused and listened, have heard the old man poke the fire, the twenty-thousand-guinea-man⁠—the son passed on, and continued his lonely walk home, the home that held a bailiff.</p>
			<p>A makeshift bed had to be made up for the bailiff in the kitchen, and there he remained the night, and was up and had lit the fire for Luce the servant before she was down. The man was certainly very civil, but still there was the shock of it.</p>
			<p>Early in the morning Iden went into town again, saw his solicitor, and got a cheque⁠—it was only five-and-twenty or thirty pounds, and the bailiff left.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
