<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
			<p>But all these shocks and worries and trampling upon her emotions made the pencil tremble in the artist's hand as she worked in the gaunt garret.</p>
			<p>One day, as she was returning from Woolhorton, Iden's solicitor, from whom he had borrowed money, overtook her, walked his horse, and began to talk to her in his perky, affected, silly way. Of all the fools in Woolhorton town there was none equal in pure idiotcy to this namby-pamby fellow—it was wonderful how a man of Iden's intelligence could trust his affairs to such a man, the more so as there was at least one good lawyer in the place. This is very characteristic of the farming race; they will work like negroes in the field, and practise the utmost penury to save a little, and be as cautious over a groat as the keenest miser, and then go and trust their most important affairs to some perfect fool of a solicitor. His father, perhaps, or his uncle, or somebody connected with the firm, had a reputation about the era of Waterloo, and upon this tradition they carry their business to a man whom they admit themselves "doan't seem up to much, yon." In the same way, or worse, for there is no tradition even in this case, they will consign a hundred pounds' worth of milk to London on the mere word of a milkman's agent, a man of straw for aught they know, and never so much as go up to town to see if there is such a milk business in existence.</p>
			<p>This jackanapes began to talk to Amaryllis about her father. "Now, don't you think, Miss Iden, you could speak to your father about these money matters; you know he's getting into a pound, he really is (the jackanapes pretended to hunt); he'll be pounded. Now, don't you think you could talk to him, and persuade him to be more practical?"</p>
			<p>The chattering of this tom-tit upset Amaryllis more than the rudeness of the gruff baker who forced his way in, and would not go. That such a contemptible nincompoop should dare to advise her father to be practical! The cleverest man in the world—advise him to be practical; as if, indeed, he was not practical and hard-working to the very utmost.</p>
			<p>To her it was a bitter insult. The pencil trembled in her hand.</p>
			<p>But what shook it most of all was anxiety about her mother. Ever since the bailiff's intrusion Mrs. Iden had seemed so unsettled. Sometimes she would come downstairs after the rest had retired, and sit by the dying fire for hours alone, till Iden chanced to wake, and go down for her.</p>
			<p>Once she went out of doors very late, leaving the front door wide open, and Amaryllis found her at midnight wandering in an aimless way among the ricks.</p>
			<p>At such times she had a glazed look in her eyes, and did not seem to see what she gazed at. At others she would begin to cry without cause, and gave indications of hysteria. The nervous Flamma family were liable to certain affections of that kind, and Amaryllis feared lest her mother's system had been overstrained by these continual worries.</p>
			<p>Poor woman! she had, indeed, been worried enough to have shaken the strongest; and, having nothing stolid in her nature, it pressed upon her.</p>
			<p>After awhile these attacks seemed to diminish, and Amaryllis hoped that nothing would come of it, but it left her in a state of extreme anxiety lest some fresh trouble should happen to renew the strain.</p>
			<p>When she thought of her mother she could not draw—the sound of her shuffling, nervous footstep on the landing or the path outside under the window stopped her at once. These things disheartened her a thousand times more than the returned sketches the postman was always bringing.</p>
			<p>On butter-making mornings, once a week, there was always a great to-do; Mrs. Iden, like nervous people, was cross and peevish when she was exceptionally busy, and clapper-clawed Iden to some purpose. It chanced that Amaryllis one day was just opening an envelope and taking out a returned drawing, when Iden entered, angry and fresh from Mrs. Iden's tongue, and, seeing the letter, began to growl:—</p>
			<p>"Better drow that there fool stuff in the vire, and zee if you can't help your mother. Better do zummat to be some use on. Pity as you wasn't a boy chap to go out and yarn summat. Humph! humph!" growl, mutter, growl. "Drow" was local for throw, "summat" for something, "yarn" for earn. Unless I give you a vocabulary you may not be able to follow him.</p>
			<p>The contemptuous allusion to her sketches as fool stuff, contrasted with the benefit and advantage of earning something—something real and solid—hit the artist very hard. That was the thought that troubled her so much, and paralysed her imagination. They were unsaleable—she saw the worthlessness of them far more than Iden. They were less in value than the paper on which they were traced; fool stuff, fit for the fire only.</p>
			<p>That was the very thought that troubled her so, and Iden hit the nail home with his rude speech. That was the material view; unless a thing be material, or will fetch something material, it is good for the fire only.</p>
			<p>So it came about that the portfolio was pushed aside, and dust gathered on it, and on the pencils, and the india-rubber, and in the little box of vine charcoal. Amaryllis having arranged her violets in the tumbler of water in the window niche, sat down at the table and leant her head on her hand, and tried to think what she could do, as she had thought these many, many days.</p>
			<p>The drawings were so unreal, and a sovereign so real. Nothing in all the world at these moments seemed to her to be so good and precious as the round disk of gold which rules everything. The good that she could do with it—with just one of those golden disks!</p>
			<p>Did you ever read Al Hariri? That accomplished scholar, the late Mr. Chenery (of <i>The Times</i>), translated twenty-six of his poems from the Arabic, and added most interesting notes. This curious book is a fusion of the Arabian Nights, Ecclesiastes, and Rabelais. There is the magical unexpectedness of the Arabian Nights, the vanity of vanities, all is vanity, of the Preacher, and the humour of the French satirist. Wisdom is scattered about it; at one moment you acknowledge a great thought, the next you are reproached for a folly, and presently laugh at a deep jest.</p>
			<p>Al Hariri has a bearing upon Amaryllis, because he sang of the dinar, the Arabian sovereign, the double-faced dinar, the reverse and the obverse, head and tail, one side giving everything good, and the other causing all evil. For the golden disk has two sides, and two Fates belong to it. First he chants its praises:—</p>
			<div class="poem2">How noble is that yellow one, whose yellowness is pure,<br/>
			Which traverses the regions, and whose journeying is afar.<br/>
			Told abroad are its fame and repute:<br/>
			Its lines are set as the secret sign of wealth;<br/>
			Its march is coupled with the success of endeavours;<br/>
			Its bright look is loved by mankind,<br/>
			As though it had been molten of their hearts.<br/>
			By its aid whoever has got it in his purse assails boldly,<br/>
			Though kindred be perished or tardy to help.<br/>
			Oh! charming are its purity and brightness;<br/>
			Charming are its sufficiency and help.<br/>
			How many a ruler is there whose rule has been perfected by it!<br/>
			How many a sumptuous one is there whose grief, but for it, would be endless!<br/>
			How many a host of cares has one charge of it put to flight!<br/>
			How many a full moon has a sum of it brought down!<br/>
			How many a one, burning with rage, whose coal is flaming,<br/>
			Has it been secretly whispered to and then his anger has softened.<br/>
			How many a prisoner, whom his kin had yielded,<br/>
			Has it delivered, so that his gladness has been unmingled.<br/>
			Now by the Truth of the Lord whose creation brought it forth,<br/>
			Were it not for His fear, I should say its power is supreme.<br/></div>
			<p>The sovereign, our dinar, does it not answer exactly to this poem of the Arabian written in the days of the Crusades! It is yellow, it is pure, it travels vast distances, and is as valuable in India as here, it is famous and has a reputation, the inscription on it is the mark of its worth, it is the sinew of war, the world loves its brightness as if it was coined from their hearts, those who have it in their purses are bold, it helps every one who has it, it banishes all cares, and one might say, were it not for fear of the Lord, that the sovereign was all mighty.</p>
			<p>All mighty for good as it seemed to Amaryllis thinking in her garret, leaning her head on her hand, and gazing at her violets; all mighty for good—if only she could get the real solid, golden sovereign!</p>
			<p>But the golden coin has another side—the obverse—another Fate, for evil, clinging to it, and the poet, changing his tone, thunders:—</p>
			<div class="poem2">Ruin on it for a deceiver and insincere,<br/>
			The yellow one with two faces like a hypocrite!<br/>
			It shows forth with two qualities to the eye of him that looks on it,<br/>
			The adornment of the loved one, the colour of the lover.<br/>
			Affection for it, think they who judge truly,<br/>
			Tempts men to commit that which shall anger their Maker.<br/>
			But for it no thief's right hand were cut off;<br/>
			Nor would tyranny be displayed by the impious;<br/>
			Nor would the niggardly shrink from the night-farer;<br/>
			Nor would the delayed claimant mourn the delay of him that withholds;<br/>
			Nor would men call to God from the envious who casts at them.<br/>
			Moreover the worst quality that it possesses<br/>
			Is that it helps thee not in straits,<br/>
			Save by fleeing from thee like a runaway slave.<br/>
			Well done he who casts it away from a hilltop,<br/>
			And who, when it whispers to him with the whispering of a lover,<br/>
			Says to it in the words of the truth-speaking, the veracious,<br/>
			"I have no mind for intimacy with thee,—begone!"<br/></div>
			<p>"The worst quality that it possesses" remains to this day, and could Amaryllis have obtained the sovereign, still it would only have helped her by passing from her, from her hand to that of the creditor's, fleeing like a runaway slave.</p>
			<p>But Amaryllis surrounded with the troubles of her father and mother, saw only the good side of the golden sovereign, only that it was all powerful to bless.</p>
			<p>How unnatural it seems that a girl like this, that young and fresh and full of generous feelings as she was, her whole mind should perforce be taken up with the question of money; an unnatural and evil state of things.</p>
			<p>It seems to me very wicked that it should be so.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
