<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>Amaryllis found the first daffodil flowering by the damask rose, and immediately ran to call her father to come and see it.</p>
			<p>There are no damask roses now, like there used to be in summer at Coombe Oaks. I have never seen one since I last gathered one from that very bush. There are many grand roses, but no fragrance⁠—the fragrance is gone out of life. Instinctively as I pass gardens in summer I look under the shade of the trees for the old roses, but they are not to be found. The dreary nurseries of evergreens and laurels⁠—cemeteries they should be called, cemeteries in appearance and cemeteries of taste⁠—are innocent of such roses. They show you an acre of what they call roses growing out of dirty straw, spindly things with a knob on the top, which even dew can hardly sweeten. “No call for damask roses⁠—wouldn’t pay to grow they. Single they was, I thinks. No good. These be cut every morning and fetched by the flower-girls for gents’ buttonholes and ladies’ jackets. You won’t get no damask roses; they be died out.”</p>
			<p>I think in despite of the nurseryman, or cemetery-keeper, that with patience I could get a damask rose even now by inquiring about from farmhouse to farmhouse. In time some old farmer, with a good old taste for old roses and pinks, would send me one; I have half a mind to try. But, alas! it is no use, I have nowhere to put it; I rent a house which is built in first-rate modern style, though small, of course, and there is a “garden” to it, but no place to put a damask rose. No place, because it is not “home,” and I cannot plant except round “home.” The plot or “patch” the landlord calls “the garden”⁠—it is about as wide as the border round a patch, old style⁠—is quite vacant, bare, and contains nothing but mould. It is nothing to me, and I cannot plant it.</p>
			<p>Not only are there no damask roses, but there is no place for them nowadays, no “home,” only villas and rented houses. Anything rented in a town can never be “home.”</p>
			<p>Farms that were practically taken on a hundred and twenty, or fifty, or perhaps two hundred years’ leases were “homes.” Consequently they had damask roses, bees, and birds about them.</p>
			<p>There had been daffodils in that spot at least a century, opening every March to the dry winds that shrivel up the brown dead leaves of winter, and carry them out from the bushes under the trees, sending them across the meadow⁠—fleeing like a routed army before the bayonets of the East. Every spring for a century at least the daffodils had bloomed there.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis did not stay to think of the century, but ran round the corner of the house, and came face to face with the east wind, which took her with such force as to momentarily stay her progress. Her skirts were blown out horizontally, her ankles were exposed, and the front line of her shape (beginning to bud like spring) was sketched against the red brick wall. She laughed, but the strong gale filled her throat as if a hand had been thrust down it; the wind got its edge like a knife under her eyelids, between them and the eyeballs, and seemed as if it would scoop them out; her eyes were wet with involuntary tears; her lips dried up and parched in a moment. The wind went through her thick stockings as if the wool was nothing. She lifted her hand to defend her eyes, and the skin of her arm became “goosey” directly. Had she worn hat or bonnet it would have flown. Stooping forwards, she pushed step by step, and gradually reached the shelter of the high garden wall; there she could stand upright, and breathe again.</p>
			<p>Her lips, which had been whitened by the keen blast, as if a storm of ice particles had been driven against them, now resumed their scarlet, but her ears were full of dust and reddened, and her curly dark hair was dry and rough and without gloss. Each separate hair separated itself from the next, and would not lie smooth⁠—the natural unctuous essence which usually caused them to adhere was dried up.</p>
			<p>The wind had blown thus round that corner every March for a century, and in no degree abated its bitter force because a beautiful human child, full of the happiness of a flower, came carelessly into its power. Nothing ever shows the least consideration for human creatures.</p>
			<p>The moss on the ridge of the wall under which she stood to breathe looked shrivelled and thin, the green tint dried out of it. A sparrow with a straw tried hard to reach the eaves of the house to put it in his nest, but the depending straw was caught by the breeze as a sail, and carried him past.</p>
			<p>Under the wall was a large patch recently dug, beside the patch a grass path, and on the path a wheelbarrow. A man was busy putting in potatoes; he wore the raggedest coat ever seen on a respectable back. As the wind lifted the tails it was apparent that the lining was loose and only hung by threads, the cuffs were worn through, there was a hole beneath each arm, and on each shoulder the nap of the cloth was gone; the colour, which had once been grey, was now a mixture of several soils and numerous kinds of grit. The hat he had on was no better; it might have been made of some hard pasteboard, it was so bare. Every now and then the wind brought a few handfuls of dust over the wall from the road, and dropped it on his stooping back.</p>
			<p>The way in which he was planting potatoes was wonderful, every potato was placed at exactly the right distance apart, and a hole made for it in the general trench; before it was set it was looked at and turned over, and the thumb rubbed against it to be sure that it was sound, and when finally put in, a little mould was delicately adjusted round to keep it in its right position till the whole row was buried. He carried the potatoes in his coat pocket⁠—those, that is, for the row⁠—and took them out one by one; had he been planting his own children he could not have been more careful. The science, the skill, and the experience brought to this potato-planting you would hardly credit; for all this care was founded upon observation, and arose from very large abilities on the part of the planter, though directed to so humble a purpose at that moment.</p>
			<p>So soon as Amaryllis had recovered breath, she ran down the grass path and stood by the wheelbarrow, but although her shadow fell across the potato row, he would not see her.</p>
			<p>“Pa,” she said, not very loud. “Pa,” growing bolder. “Do come⁠—there’s a daffodil out, the very, very first.”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” a sound like a growl⁠—“oh,” from the depth of a vast chest heaving out a doubtful note.</p>
			<p>“It is such a beautiful colour!”</p>
			<p>“Where is your mother?” looking at her askance and still stooping.</p>
			<p>“Indoors⁠—at least⁠—I think⁠—no⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Haven’t you got no sewing? Can’t you help her? What good be you on?”</p>
			<p>“But this is such a lovely daffodil, and the very first⁠—now do come!”</p>
			<p>“Flowers bean’t no use on; such trumpery as that; what do’ee want a-messing about arter thaay? You’ll never be no good on; you ain’t never got a apron on.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—just a minute now.”</p>
			<p>“Go on in, and be some use on.”</p>
			<p>Amaryllis’ lip fell; she turned and walked slowly away along the path, her head drooping forward.</p>
			<p>Did ever anyone have a beautiful idea or feeling without being repulsed?</p>
			<p>She had not reached the end of the path, however, when the father began to change his attitude; he stood up, dropped his “dibbler,” scraped his foot on his spade, and, grumbling to himself, went after her. She did not see or hear him till he overtook her.</p>
			<p>“Please, I’ll go and do the sewing,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Where be this yer flower?” gruffly.</p>
			<p>“I’ll show you,” taking his ragged arm, and brightening up immediately. “Only think, to open in all this wind, and so cold⁠—isn’t it beautiful? It’s much more beautiful than the flowers that come in the summer.”</p>
			<p>“Trumpery rubbish⁠—mean to dig ’em all up⁠—would if I had time,” muttered the father. “Have ’em carted out and drowed away⁠—do for ashes to drow on the fields. Never no good on to nobody, thaay thengs. You can’t eat ’em, can you, like you can potatoes?”</p>
			<p>“But it’s lovely. Here it is,” and Amaryllis stepped on the patch tenderly, and lifted up the drooping face of the flower.</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes,” said Iden, putting his left hand to his chin, a habit of his when thinking, and suddenly quite altering his pronunciation from that of the country folk and labourers amongst whom he dwelt to the correct accent of education. “Ah, yes; the daffodil was your great-uncle’s favourite flower.”</p>
			<p>“Richard?” asked Amaryllis.</p>
			<p>“Richard,” repeated Iden. And Amaryllis, noting how handsome her father’s intellectual face looked, wandered in her mind from the flower as he talked, and marvelled how he could be so rough sometimes, and why he talked like the labourers, and wore a ragged coat⁠—he who was so full of wisdom in his other moods, and spoke, and thought, and indeed acted as a perfect gentleman.</p>
			<p>“Richard’s favourite flower,” he went on. “He brought the daffodils down from Luckett’s; every one in the garden came from there. He was always reading poetry, and writing, and sketching, and yet he was such a capital man of business; no one could understand that. He built the mill, and saved heaps of money; he bought back the old place at Luckett’s, which belonged to us before Queen Elizabeth’s days; indeed, he very nearly made up the fortunes Nicholas and the rest of them got rid of. He was, indeed, a man. And now it is all going again⁠—faster than he made it. He used to take you on his knee and say you would walk well, because you had a good ankle.”</p>
			<p>Amaryllis blushed and smoothed her dress with her hands, as if that would lengthen the skirt and hide the ankles which Richard, the great-uncle, had admired when she was a child, being a man, but which her feminine acquaintances told her were heavy.</p>
			<p>“Here, put on your hat and scarf; how foolish of you to go out in this wind without them!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Iden, coming out. She thrust them into Amaryllis’ unwilling hands, and retired indoors again immediately.</p>
			<p>“He was the only one of all the family,” continued her father, “who could make money; all the rest could do nothing but spend it. For ten generations he was the only moneymaker and saver, and yet he was as free and liberal as possible. Very curious, wasn’t it?⁠—only one in ten generations⁠—difficult to understand why none of the others⁠—why⁠—” He paused, thinking.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis, too, was silent, thinking⁠—thinking how easily her papa could make money, great heaps of money. She was sure he could if he tried, instead of planting potatoes.</p>
			<p>“If only another Richard would rise up like him!” said Iden.</p>
			<p>This was a very unreasonable wish, for, having had one genius in the family, and that, too, in the memory of man, they could not expect another. Even vast empires rarely produce more than one great man in all the course of their history. There was but one Caesar in the thousand years of Rome; Greece never had one as a nation, unless we except Themistocles, or unless we accept Alexander, who was a Macedonian; Persia had a Cyrus; there was a Tamerlane somewhere, but few people know anything of the empire he overshadows with his name; France has had two mighty warriors, Charlemagne and Napoleon⁠—unfortunate France! As for ourselves, fortunate islanders! we have never had a great man so immensely great as to overtop the whole, like Charlemagne in his day. Fortunate for us, indeed, that it has been so. But the best example to the point is the case of the immense empire of Russia, which has had one Peter the Great, and one only. Great-uncle Richard was the Peter the Great of his family, whose work had been slowly undone by his successors.</p>
			<p>“I wonder whether any of us will ever turn out like Richard,” continued Iden. “No one could deny him long; he had a way of persuading and convincing people, and always got his own will in the end. Wonderful man!” he pondered, returning towards his work.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the side door opened, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Iden just peered out, and cried, “Put your hat and scarf on directly.”</p>
			<p>Amaryllis put the hat on, and wound the scarf very loosely about her neck. She accompanied her father to the potato patch, hoping that he would go on talking, but he was quickly absorbed in the potatoes. She watched him stooping till his back was an arch; in fact, he had stooped so much that now he could not stand upright, though still in the prime of life; if he stood up and stretched himself, still his back was bowed at the shoulders. He worked so hard⁠—ever since she could remember she had seen him working like this; he was up in the morning while it was yet dark tending the cattle; sometimes he was up all night with them, wind or weather made no difference. Other people stopped indoors if it rained much, but it made no difference to her father, nor did the deep snow or the sharp frosts. Always at work, and he could talk so cleverly, too, and knew everything, and yet they were so short of money. How could this be?</p>
			<p>What a fallacy it is that hard work is the making of money; I could show you plenty of men who have worked the whole of their lives as hard as ever could possibly be, and who are still as far off independence as when they began. In fact, that is the rule; the winning of independence is rarely the result of work, else nine out of ten would be well-to-do.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
