<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>So Amaryllis went up into the gaunt, cold room at the top of the house, and bent herself seriously to drawing. There was no fireplace, and if there had been they could not have allowed her coals; coals were dear. It was quite an event when the horse and cart went to the wharf for coal. There was plenty of wood for the hearth⁠—wood grew on the farm⁠—but coal was money.</p>
			<p>The March winds howled round the corner of the old thatched house, and now and again tremendous rains blew up against the little western window near which she had placed her table. Through the silent cold of January, the moist cold of February, the east winds and hurricane rains of March, Amaryllis worked on in her garret, heedless of nipped fingers and chilled feet.</p>
			<p>Sometimes she looked out of the window and watched Iden digging in the garden underneath, planting his potatoes, pruning his trees and shrubs, or farther away, yonder in the meadow, clearing out the furrows that the water might flow better⁠—“trenching,” as he called it.</p>
			<p>The harder it rained the harder he worked at this in the open, with a sack about his shoulders like a cloak; the labourers were under shelter, the master was out in the wet, hoping by guiding the water to the grass to get a larger crop of hay in June.</p>
			<p>Bowed under his sack, with his rotten old hat, he looked a woeful figure as the heavy shower beat on his back. But to Amaryllis he was always her father.</p>
			<p>Sometimes she went into the next room⁠—the lumber-room⁠—only lighted by a window on a level with the floor, a window which had no glass, but only a wire network. Sitting on the floor there, she could see him at the stile across the road, his hands behind his back, gossiping now with another farmer or two, now with a labourer, now with an old woman carrying home a yoke of water from the brook.</p>
			<p>The gossiping hurt Amaryllis even more than the work in the cold rain; it seemed so incongruous, so out of character, so unlike the real Iden as she knew him.</p>
			<p>That he, with his great, broad and noble forehead, and his profile like Shakespeare, should stand there talk, talk, talking on the smallest hamlet topics with old women, and labourers, and thickheaded farmers, was to her a bewilderment and annoyance.</p>
			<p>She could not understand it, and she resented it. The real Iden she knew was the man of thought and old English taste, who had told her so much by the fireside of that very Shakespeare whom in features he resembled, and of the poets from Elizabethan days downwards. His knowledge seemed to be endless; there was no great author he had not read, no subject upon which he could not at least tell her where to obtain information. Yet she knew he had never had what is now called an education. How clever he must be to know all these things! You see she did not know how wonderful is the gift of observation, which Iden possessed to a degree that was itself genius. Nothing escaped him; therefore his store was great.</p>
			<p>No other garden was planted as Iden’s garden was, in the best of old English taste, with old English flowers and plants, herbs and trees. In summer time it was a glory to see: a place for a poet, a spot for a painter, loved and resorted to by every bird of the air. Of a bare old farmhouse he had made a beautiful home.</p>
			<p>Questions upon questions her opening mind had poured upon him, and to all he had given her an answer that was an explanation. About the earth and about the sea, the rivers, and living things; about the stars and sun, the comet, the wonders of the firmament, of geology and astronomy, of science; there was nothing he did not seem to know.</p>
			<p>A man who had crossed the wide ocean as that Ulysses of whom he read to her, and who, like that Ulysses, enjoyed immense physical strength, why was he like this? Why was he so poor? Why did he work in the rain under a sack? Why did he gossip at the stile with the small-brained hamlet idlers?</p>
			<p>It puzzled her and hurt her at the same time.</p>
			<p>I cannot explain why it was so, any better than Amaryllis; I could give a hundred reasons, and then there would be no explanation⁠—say partly circumstances, partly lack of a profession in which talent would tell, partly an indecision of character⁠—too much thought⁠—and, after all said and done, Fate.</p>
			<p>Watching him from the network window, Amaryllis felt her heart drooping, she knew not why, and went back to her drawing unstrung.</p>
			<p>She worked very hard, and worked in vain. The sketches all came back to her. Some of them had a torn hole at the corner where they had been carelessly filed, others a thumb-mark, others had been folded wrongly, almost all smelt of tobacco. Neither illustrated papers, periodicals: neither editors nor publishers would have anything to do with them. One or two took more care, and returned the drawings quite clean; one sent a note saying that they promised well.</p>
			<p>Poor Amaryllis! They promised well, and she wanted half a sovereign <em>now</em>. If a prophet assured a man that the picture he could not now dispose of would be worth a thousand pounds in fifty years, what consolation would that be to him?</p>
			<p>They were all a total failure. So many letters could not be received in that dull place without others in the house seeing what was going on. Once now and then Amaryllis heard a step on the stairs⁠—a shuffling, uncertain step⁠—and her heart began to beat quicker, for she knew it was her mother. Somehow, although she loved her so dearly, she felt that there was not much sympathy between them. She did not understand her mother; the mother did not understand the daughter. Though she was working for her mother’s sake, when she heard her mother’s step she was ashamed of her work.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden would come in and shuffle round the room, drawing one foot along the floor in an aggravating way she had, she was not lame, and look out of window, and presently stand behind Amaryllis, and say⁠—</p>
			<p>“Ah! you’ll never do anything at that. Never do anything. I’ve seen too much of it. Better come down and warm yourself.”</p>
			<p>Now this annoyed Amaryllis so much because it seemed so inconsistent. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Iden blew up her husband for having no enterprise, and then turned round and discouraged her daughter for being enterprising, and this, too, although she was constantly talking about the superiority of the art employments of the Flammas in London to the clodhopper work around her.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis could never draw a line till her mother had gone downstairs again, and then the words kept repeating themselves in her ear⁠—“Never do no good at that, never do no good at that.”</p>
			<p>If we were to stay to analyse deeply, perhaps we should find that Amaryllis was working for a mother of her own imagination, and not for the mother of fact.</p>
			<p>Anyone who sits still, writing, drawing, or sewing, feels the cold very much more than those who are moving indoors or out. It was bitterly cold in the gaunt garret, the more so because the wind came unchecked through the wire network of the window in the next room. But for that her generous young heart cared nothing, nor for the still colder wind of failure.</p>
			<p>She had no name⁠—no repute, therefore had her drawings been equal to the finest ever produced they would not have been accepted. Until the accident of reputation arises genius is of no avail.</p>
			<p>Except an author, or an artist, or a musician, who on earth would attempt to win success by merit? That alone proves how correct the world is in its estimation of them; they must indeed be poor confiding fools. Succeed by merit!</p>
			<p>Does the butcher, or the baker, or the ironmonger, or the tallow-chandler rely on personal merit, or purely personal ability for making a business? They rely on a little capital, credit, and much push. The solicitor is first an articled clerk, and works next as a subordinate, his “footing” costs hundreds of pounds, and years of hard labour. The doctor has to “walk the hospitals,” and, if he can, he buys a practice. They do not rely on merit.</p>
			<p>The three fools⁠—the author, the artist, and the musician⁠—put certain lines on a sheet of paper and expect the world to at once admire their clever ideas.</p>
			<p>In the end⁠—but how far is it to the end!⁠—it is true that genius is certain of recognition; the steed by then has grown used to starvation, waiting for the grass to grow. Look about you: Are the prosperous men of business men of merit? are they all clever? are they geniuses? They do not exactly seem to be so.</p>
			<p>Nothing so hard as to succeed by merit; no path so full of disappointments; nothing so incredibly impossible.</p>
			<p>I would infinitely rather be a tallow-chandler, with a good steady income and no thought, than an author; at the first opportunity I mean to go into the tallow business.</p>
			<p>Until the accident of reputation chanced to come to her, Amaryllis might work and work, and hope and sigh, and sit benumbed in her garret, and watch her father, Shakespeare Iden, clearing the furrows in the rain, under his sack.</p>
			<p>She had not even a diploma⁠—a diploma, or a certificate, a South Kensington certificate! Fancy, without even a certificate! Misguided child!</p>
			<p>What a hideous collection of frumpery they have got there at the Museum, as many acres as Iden’s farm, shot over with all the rubbish of the “periods.” What a mockery of true art feeling it is! They have not even a single statue in the place. They would shrivel up in horror at a nude model. <em>They</em> teach art⁠—miserable sham, their wretched art culminates in a Christmas card.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis had not even been through the South Kensington “grind,” and dared to send in original drawings without a certificate. Ignorance, you see, pure clodhopper ignorance.</p>
			<p>Failure waited on her labours; the postman brought them all back again.</p>
			<p>Yet in her untaught simplicity she had chosen the line which the very highest in the profession would probably have advised her to take. She drew what she knew. The great carthorse, the old barn up the road, the hollow tree, the dry reeds, the birds, and chanticleer himself⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>High was his comb, and coral red withal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dents embattled like a castle wall.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Hardly a circumstance of farm life she did not sketch; the fogger with his broad knife cutting hay; the ancient labourer sitting in the wheelbarrow munching his bread-and-cheese, his face a study for Teniers; the team coming home from plough⁠—winter scenes, most of them, because it was winter time. There are those who would give fifty pounds for one of those studies now, crumpled, stained, and torn as they are.</p>
			<p>It was a complete failure. Once only she had a gleam of success. Iden picked up the sketch of the dry reeds in the brook, and after looking at it, put it in his “Farmer’s Calendar,” on the mantelshelf. Amaryllis felt like the young painter whose work is at last hung at the Academy. His opinion was everything to her. He valued her sketch.</p>
			<p>Still, that was not money. The cold wind and the chill of failure still entered her garret study. But it was neither of these that at length caused the portfolio to be neglected, she would have worked on and on, hoping against hope, undaunted, despite physical cold and moral check. It was the procession of creditors.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
