<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
			<p>Right at the top of the house there was a large, unfurnished room, which Amaryllis had taken as her own long since. It was her study, her thinking-room, her private chapel and praying-room, her one place of solitude, silence, and retirement.</p>
			<p>The days had gone on, and it was near the end of April. Coming up the dark stairs one morning, she found them still darker, because she had just left the sunshine. They were built very narrow, as usual in old country-houses, and the landing shut off with a door, so that when you were in them you seemed to be in a box. There was no carpet⁠—bare boards; old-fashioned folk did not carpet their stairs; no handrail; the edges of the steps worm-eaten and ragged, little bits apt to break off under sudden pressure, so that the board looked as if it had been nibbled by mice.</p>
			<p>Shutting the landing door behind her, Amaryllis was in perfect darkness, but her feet knew the well-remembered way, and she came quickly to the top.</p>
			<p>There were two great rooms running the whole length of the house: the first was a lumber-room, the second her own especial cell. Cell-like it was, in its monastic or conventual bareness. It was vague with bareness: a huge, square room, gaunt as a barn, the walls and ceiling whitewashed, the floor plain boards. Yonder, near the one small window, stood a table and tall-backed oaken chair, afar off, as it were, from the doorway⁠—a journey to them across the creaking floor. On one side an old four-post bedstead of dark oak, much damaged, was placed by the wall; the sacking hung down in a loop, torn and decayed⁠—a bedstead on which no one had slept these hundred years past. By the table there was, too, an ancient carved linen-press of black oak, Amaryllis’ bookcase.</p>
			<p>These bits of rude furniture were lost in the vastness of space, as much as if you had thrown your hat into the sky.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis went straight to the window and knelt down. She brought a handful of violets, fresh-gathered, to place in the glass which she kept there for her flowers. The window was cut in the thick wall, and formed a niche, where she always had a tumbler ready⁠—a common glass tumbler, she could not afford a vase.</p>
			<p>They were the white wild violets, the sweetest of all, gathered while the nightingale was singing his morning song in the April sunshine⁠—a song the world never listens to, more delicious than his evening notes, for the sunlight helps him, and the blue of the heavens, the green leaf, and the soft wind⁠—all the soul of spring.</p>
			<p>White wild violets, a dewdrop as it were of flower, tender and delicate, growing under the great hawthorn hedge, by the mosses and among the dry, brown leaves of last year, easily overlooked unless you know exactly where to go for them. She had a bunch for her neck, and a large bunch for her niche. They would have sunk and fallen into the glass, but she hung them by their chins over the edge of the tumbler, with their stalks in the water. Then she sat down in the old chair at the table, and rested her head on her hand.</p>
			<p>Except where she did this every day, and so brushed it, a thin layer of dust had covered the surface (there was no cloth) and had collected on her portfolio, thrust aside and neglected. Dust on the indiarubber, dust on the cake of Indian ink, dust invisible on the smooth surface of the pencils, dust in the little box of vine charcoal.</p>
			<p>The hoarse baying of the hungry wolves around the house had shaken the pencil from her fingers⁠—Siberian wolves they were, racing over the arid deserts of debt, large and sharp-toothed, ever increasing in number and ferocity, ready to tear the very door down. There are no wolves like those debt sends against a house.</p>
			<p>Every knock at the door, every strange footstep up the approach, every letter that came, was like the gnawing and gnashing of savage teeth.</p>
			<p>Iden could plant the potatoes and gossip at the stile, and put the letters unopened on the mantelshelf⁠—a pile of bills over his head where he slept calmly after dinner. Iden could plant potatoes, and cut trusses of hay, and go through <i>his</i> work to appearance unmoved.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis could not draw⁠—she could not do it; her imagination refused to see the idea; the more she concentrated her mind, the louder she heard the ceaseless grinding and gnashing of teeth.</p>
			<p>Potatoes can be planted and nails can be hammered, bill-hooks can be wielded and faggots chopped, no matter what the inward care. The ploughman is deeply in debt, poor fellow, but he can, and does, follow the plough, and finds, perhaps, some solace in the dull monotony of his labour. Clods cannot feel. A sensitive mind and vivid imagination⁠—a delicately-balanced organization, that almost lives on its ideas as veritable food⁠—cannot do like this. The poet, the artist, the author, the thinker, cannot follow their plough; their work depends on a serene mind.</p>
			<p>But experience proves that they <i>do</i> do their work under such circumstances. They do; how greatly then they must be tortured, or for what a length of time they must have suffered to become benumbed.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis was young, and all her feelings unchecked of Time. She could not sketch⁠—that was a thing of useless paper and pencil; what was wanted was money. She could not read, that was not real; what was wanted was solid coin.</p>
			<p>So the portfolio was thrust aside, neglected and covered with dust, but she came every day to her flowers in the window-niche.</p>
			<p>She had drawn up there in the bitter cold of February and March, without a fire, disdainful of ease in the fulness of her generous hope. Her warm young blood cared nothing for the cold, if only by enduring it she could assist those whom she loved.</p>
			<p>There were artists in the Flamma family in London who made what seemed to her large incomes, yet whose names had never been seen in a newspaper criticism, and who had never even sent a work to the Academy⁠—never even tried to enter. Their work was not of an ambitious order, but it was well paid.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis did not for a moment anticipate success as an artist, nor think to take the world by storm with her talent. Her one only hope was to get a few pounds now and then⁠—she would have sold twenty sketches for ten shillings⁠—to save her father from insult, and to give her mother the mere necessities of dress she needed.</p>
			<p>No thought of possible triumph, nor was she sustained by an overmastering love of art; she was inspired by her heart, not her genius.</p>
			<p>Had circumstances been different she would not have earnestly practised drawing; naturally she was a passive rather than an active artist.</p>
			<p>She loved beauty for its own sake⁠—she loved the sunlight, the grass and trees, the gleaming water, the colours of the fields and of the sky. To listen to the running water was to her a dear delight, to the wind in the high firs, or caught in the wide-stretching arms of the oak; she rested among these things, they were to her mind as sleep to the body. The few good pictures she had seen pleased her, but did not rouse the emotion the sunlight caused; artificial music was enjoyable, but not like the running stream. It said nothing⁠—the stream was full of thought.</p>
			<p>No eager desire to paint like that or play like that was awakened by pictures or music; Amaryllis was a passive and not an active artist by nature. And I think that is the better part; at least, I know it is a thousand times more pleasure to me to see a beautiful thing than to write about it. Could I choose I would go on seeing beautiful things, and not writing.</p>
			<p>Amaryllis had no ambition whatever for name or fame; to be silent in the sunshine was enough for her. By chance she had inherited the Flamma talent⁠—she drew at once without effort or consideration; it was not so much to her as it is to me to write a letter.</p>
			<p>The thought to make use of her power did not occur to her until the preceding Christmas. Roast beef and plum pudding were a bitter mockery at Coombe Oaks⁠—a sham and cold delusion, cold as snow. A “merry Christmas”⁠—holly berries, mistletoe⁠—and behind these⁠—debt. Behind the glowing fire, written in the flames⁠—debt; in the sound of the distant chimes⁠—debt. Now be merry over the plum-pudding while the wolves gnash their teeth, wolves that the strongest bars cannot keep out.</p>
			<p>Immediately the sacred day was past they fell in all their fury upon Iden. Pay me that thou owest! The one only saying in the Gospel thoroughly engrained in the hearts of men. Pay me that thou owest! This is the message from the manger at Bethlehem of our modern Christmas.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
